Improve buffering, refactor audio and DRM buffer handling (#120)
rellla/vdr-plugin-softhddevice-drm-gles: DEVELOPER.md

This synchronization mechanism is only done when a stream starts, or when the data after a frame does not start with the sync word.
The latter can happen for example on bad reception when garbage is received.

## Buffering

> The audio and video data is buffered when VDR calls `SetPlayMode(pmAudioVideo)`, or `Clear()`, or when the buffer underruns during playback.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The audio and video data is buffered when VDR calls `SetPlayMode(pmAudioVideo)`, `Clear()` or when the buffer underruns during playback.
```

> The first audio PTS value and the first video PTS value VDR sends (and are received in `PlayVideo()`/`PlayAudio()`) differ in most cases (up to 3.5s were observed).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The first audio PTS value and the first video PTS value which VDR sends (and which are received in `PlayVideo()`/`PlayAudio()`) differ in most cases (up to 3.5s were observed).
```

The subset having only video or only audio is dropped, so that playback starts at the first frame where video *and* audio are present.

> However, the first received video frame is not dropped but displayed immediately after `Clear()` is called.

Reviewer: can you point me to the place in the code for that?

Author: This is set in softhddevice.cpp:697: https://github.com/rellla/vdr-plugin-softhddevice-drm-gles/pull/120/files#diff-324c042a2af7447ee936b59994e67c93f289d913e7be332acb4df5a558573a78R697

This comes into handy when using `SkipSeconds`, having a responsive experience when seeking in a recording.

To calculate if the buffer fill levels are sufficient to start playback, the following algorithm is implemented:

- Start decoding audio and video as soon as packets arrive, but do not start playback, yet.
- On each `Play*()` invocation, find the oldest PTS in each buffer (audio and video).

> - Use the buffer with the newer of both values to calculate its fill level (this will be the buffer having audio *and* video the whole buffer).

Reviewer: Maybe it's only me and this is correct, but i don't understand the wording of "having audio *and* video the whole buffer)"

Author: I wanted to express, when there is audio received with a PTS ealier than the first video PTS, than this part has audio, but no video. I'm happy to get this improved! A second pair of eyes might have a better wording.

- When the fill threshold of that buffer is reached, truncate the above mentioned subset of the other buffer.

> - Wait if the display output queue is not completely filled, yet.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Wait until the display output queue is completely filled.
```

### Example: Buffering a H.264 Live Stream

This is a real-life example, switching to the TV station "DMAX" (576i/H.264).

The first video packets (20.890-21.510s) are dropped, because they contain no codec information/I-frame.
So, the first frame the decoder outputs is 21.510s, which is also the first frame being displayed.

All audio samples are dropped (21.510-20.302=1.208s), which have PTS values before the initially displayed video frame to let audio and video start in sync.

At the point the buffer threshold is reached (450ms), the audio buffer has a size of 21.886-21.510=0.376s and the video buffer of 22.490-21.510=0.980s.

The audio buffer size is apparently below the threshold in this example.
Nevertheless, the buffer threshold is reached, because the the PTS values represent the start of a frame, and the threshold calculation takes the end of the last audio frame into account.

The PTS timestamps in the following timeline are truncated to seconds for simplicity, but represent real values.

```mermaid
timeline
title PTS Timeline: Live Stream Buffering

section Dropped
20.302s: First arrived audio packet
20.890s: First arrived video packet
section Displayed

> 21.510s: First video packet with a key frame: First audio/video frame to be output

Reviewer: really a key frame? Or is it an I-Frame?

Author: Hm, I use them as synonyms. What's the difference?

Reviewer: An
IDR (Instantaneous Decoder Refresh) frame is a special type of I-frame (Intra-coded frame); while both are self-contained and don't need previous frames for decoding themselves, an IDR frame acts as a hard reset, clearing the decoder's buffer and ensuring no future frame can reference any prior data, making it the perfect, reliable point for seeking (skipping) in a video, whereas a regular I-frame might have subsequent P/B-frames referencing it, making it less reliable for random access. In essence, all IDRs are I-frames, but not all I-frames are IDRs, with IDRs offering guaranteed clean starts.

Afaik an IDR frame in ffmpeg has the AV_FRAME_FLAG_KEY flag. Thats why i suggested it above.

Author: Thanks for the insight! I will express it more neutral, since I don't know what type the frame really is.

2025-12-07T11:21:26.942381+0100 raspi vdr[118560]: [118572] [softhddevice][Packet] videocodec: ReceiveFrame:      2 PTS  4:36:27.179 --->> ( 1)
2025-12-07T11:21:26.953928+0100 raspi vdr[118560]: [118572] [softhddevice][Packet] videocodec: SendPacket:        4 PTS  4:36:27.139 <<---
2025-12-07T11:21:26.956967+0100 raspi vdr[118560]: [118572] [softhddevice][Packet] videocodec: SendPacket:        5 PTS  4:36:27.119 <<---
2025-12-07T11:21:26.960527+0100 raspi vdr[118560]: [118572] [softhddevice][Packet] videocodec: SendPacket:        6 PTS  4:36:27.159 <<---
2025-12-07T11:21:26.970708+0100 raspi vdr[118560]: [118572] [softhddevice][Packet] videocodec: SendPacket:        7 PTS  4:36:27.219 <<---
2025-12-07T11:21:26.973824+0100 raspi vdr[118560]: [118572] [softhddevice][Packet] videocodec: SendPacket:        8 PTS  4:36:27.199 <<---
2025-12-07T11:21:26.976761+0100 raspi vdr[118560]: [118572] [softhddevice][Packet] videocodec: SendPacket:        9 PTS  4:36:27.239 <<---
2025-12-07T11:21:26.976777+0100 raspi vdr[118560]: [118572] [softhddevice][Packet] videocodec: ReceiveFrame:      3 PTS  4:36:27.199 --->> ( 6)
```

> To overcome this, the decoder is forced to wait four B-frames, before putting out the very first frame by setting `m_pVideoCtx->has_b_frames = 4`.

Reviewer: Having it already said, i would give the keyframe flag a chance. Maybe in a follow-up.
